Soaring predictor, by Eduardo de Angelis


Business Understanding


The purpose of this project is to build a model to predict the soaring potential for the practice of paragliding.

Paragliding is a modality of the sport of free-flying, whose vehicle  of choice is a paraglider. It is the simplest form of modern aircrafts, and since it has no form of propulsion, it relies on tapping into masses of rising air to gain altitude and extend both time and range of flight. This project aims to predict how observed weather related features, such as temperature and pressure, translate directly into flight metrics.

Although free-flight includes other modalities that use different types of aircrafts, like hang-gliders and sail planes, the methodology used here will attempt  to capture the nuances that are unique to paragliders, and are not considered by existing models. Therefore, extending the conclusions of this study to these other styles of free flight, though generally applicable, will bring bias and limitations. This project also aims to serve as an alternative to the somewhat complex interfaces of the soaring predictors currently available. Inference on how different atmospheric features translate into soaring potential are beyond the scope of this study.

Data Understanding

The labels will be obtained by flight logs scrapped from an online forum – www.paraglidingforum.com. There files are generated by gps-like devices and contain information about time, altitude and geographic coordinates.
The core of the predictors will be sourced from METAR reports, available from different sources. (such as https://mesonet.agron.iastate.edu). These files are in csv format and contain general weather related information, such as observed temperature, pressure, humidity, etc. Complementary weather data will be sourced by http://www.noaa.gov .

Data Preparation

All data will be stored in a Postgres SQL database after  cleaning and unit transformation. Maximum altitude, total altitude gain and geographic grid will be extracted after manipulation.

Modeling

A non-parametric model such as random forest or gradient boosting are the natural candidates for the model. Clustering and other unsupervised will be used as part of exploratory data analysis.

Evaluation

The predictive model will be evaluated on independent test set (corresponding to 20% of the data) and also on a k-fold cross validation.


Deployment

The minimum viable project will consist in predicting maximum altitude for the following day.  Total altitude gain and mapping of recurrent generators  (a.k.a “thermal houses”) are also part of the scope.
