Soaring predictor, by Eduardo de Angelis


Business Understanding


The purpose of this project was to build a model to predict the soaring potential for the practice of paragliding.

Paragliding is a modality of the sport of free-flying, whose vehicle  of choice is a paraglider. It is the simplest form of modern aircrafts, and since it has no form of propulsion, it relies on tapping into masses of rising air to gain altitude and extend both time and range of flight. This project aims to predict how observed weather related features, such as temperature and pressure, translate directly into flight metrics.

Although free-flight includes other modalities that use different types of aircrafts, like hang-gliders and sail planes, the methodology used here attempts  to capture the nuances that are unique to paragliders, and are not considered by existing models. Therefore, extending the conclusions of this study to these other styles of free flight, though generally applicable, will bring bias and limitations. This project also aims to serve as an alternative to the somewhat complex interfaces of the soaring predictors currently available. Inference on how different atmospheric features translate into soaring potential are beyond the scope of this study.

Data Understanding

The labels were obtained by flight logs scrapped from an online forum – www.paraglidingforum.com. There files are generated by gps-like devices and contain information about time, altitude and geographic coordinates during every second of the flight.
The core of the predictors were sourced from METAR reports from the Renton Municipal Airport.These reports are in csv format and contain general weather information, such as observed temperature, pressure, humidity, etc. 

Data Preparation

All data was stored in a Postgres SQL database after  cleaning and unit transformation. Maximum altitude, range of flight and geographic grid were extracted after manipulation.

Modeling

A non-parametric model such as random forest or gradient boosting were the natural candidates for the model. (Though Random Forest performed best). Clustering was also used as part of exploratory data analysis and feature engineering

Evaluation

The predictive model was evaluated on independent test set (corresponding to 20% of the data) and also on a k-fold cross validation.


Deployment

You can find the results of this tool on soaringtiger.me. Next steps include the mapping of recurrent generators  (a.k.a “thermal houses”) and the incorporation of other weather stations.
